---
title: Lives Of Great Men
author: Chike Edozien
year: 2017
date: 2026-1-31
desc: Not really a review. Having read this more than once, I'm only speaking about the elements of Edozien's 2017 memoir that I find most enduring. But there's a little thematic reflection, as well as some brief personal thoughts on what makes this meaningful.
authorImage: /assets/images/readings/author-img/chike-edozien.png
---

I really do like memoirs. The review behind this one is “Swing Time” [^1] by Zadie Smith, and the review coming soon after this is Kernighan’s “UNIX: A History and a Memoir”. I love stories, and it’s always fun to (at least attempt to) take in the breadth of another’s working human experiences in the pages that they make available to you. Memoirs (or stories written like them) feel intimate: I feel small and naïve once more, like a child hanging on the every word of a close, older relative who is chronicling their adventurous life so far—the achievements, mistakes, lessons, lows, and everything in between. It is for this same reason that I found it difficult to put down Edozien’s memoir once I started it. I have, in fact, read it multiple times before this iteration, but I restarted the process at the turn of the year because I needed its elements to be fresh in my mind whilst writing this review. 

Connecting with Edozien was instantaneous because so many aspects of our shared identity overlap. Like him, I am a Nigerian with strong *Igbo* roots that spent a large portion of my formative years in Lagos. We also seemed to (at least initially) grapple with the complexities that come with being a *third culture kid [^2],* and as of late, I’ve toggled between Lagos, my home base; Abuja, where family resides; and Berekuso, in the Eastern Region of Ghana, for school. Prior to this arrangement, I was in South Africa for my A-Levels and looking forward to December visits to Anambra, my mother’s home, for the Christmas holidays. My cumulative travel log does not yet categorise as extensive, but I have (albeit in a measured quantity) seen different places and people, in all their diversity. 

And in this mesh, sexuality has been a pertinent theme. Across the continent, I have witnessed and celebrated queer lives, whilst also grappling (more internally than I should) with the social bigotry towards this demographic in each milieu. And though these fires of hate burn with a different intensity in different spaces, I have seen—on more than one occasion—how vitriolic it can get. *Lives of Great Men* is relevant literature in these times, and I remain grateful for the role Edozien plays as a conduit for social education, awareness, and commentary on the lives that continue to live and love in defiance.

I’m not sure the right move for this review would be to publish all the notes I took whilst reading through each chapter, for I fear I may rob you of the first-hand experience of learning (or re-learning) about the activities within each anecdote. Like most memoirs, it swings around its central axis, the protagonist. However, this book is as much about the scores of men within it as it is about Edozien, and he is successful in his bid to allow each character its own stage and presence, a sense of individuality within the moving prose. I intend to, instead, speak about my favourite of these:

- **Thomas Morgan, or Tom:** Upon graduating from college, our writer spends the 3rd chapter, “Out @ Work”, recounting his early work experiences. For a person fresh out of school, it’s livelier than I would have imagined. There’s heavy tragedy, violence, and trauma in this segment and the one’s to come, but with early foundational work at NABJ (National Association of Black Journalists) and then the AFRican Magazine, the positive bit is that he is doing well for himself by steadily climbing up the corporate ladder. And as you would expect in the life of someone doing so much in so many new spaces, he is forming relationships in abundance. One of these was with Thomas Morgan III, a “tall, broad shouldered” man with the “highest-wattage smile” he had ever seen. Although his intentions with “Tom” were initially romantic, they form a platonic bond that sits steadily across the duration of Tom’s life [^3]. His dynamic with Tom sits as the first bullet point I’ve written not just because of its nominal position in the story, but because friendship as a relationship category can be so easily overlooked. There is a different kind of purity in the platonic, and I’m a fan of how Edozien credits him as the reason he “got to understand how gay men could have family outside of blood that ran so deep.” I also like his relationship with Peter, a (then) 51-year-old man he meets in Ghana around 2008, for similar reasons. I love my friends. I love friendship. And it’s hard not to feel warmth when you witness the platonic purity that emanates from these dynamics.
- **Amadou Diallo:** In the opening paragraphs, I talked about how hard it was to put down this memoir when I started going again this month. That isn’t entirely true: I closed the book for about a week after reading about how Diallo was brutally murdered by four white NYPD officers. On review, I suppose the lump in my throat came from a culmination of different factors. The first of which was because of how many parallels I could draw between him, my life, and that of my friends in similar periphery. I don’t school in the US, but as an international student in pursuit of your goals in another country, it feels terrifyingly tragic to come to terms with the possibility that one’s hopes and dreams could be snuffed out by the flames of prejudice. In fact, in reflecting on the events surrounding the tragedy, Edozien says what every black or foreign national was probably thinking: that “…this could have been me.” The second reason it felt so heavy on my heart is because of the fact that this happened in 1999. We are in 2026, and although some measured steps have been taken in the right direction, it’s heartbreaking to realise that stories like Diallo’s aren’t uncommon. It isn’t an anomaly, and the tragedies our media houses present daily comes in droves. This issue extends well beyond the global west, too. As a Nigerian, I’ve seen the #ENDSARS protests unfold up close and personal, and how can you not lose a little hope in humanity when the same structures that are meant to protect you turn around repeatedly with the sole intention of harming you instead? I don’t know whether change will eventually come or if it will come at all, but in all of this, I pray that Amadou continues to rest well. That we continue to do the work [^4]—regardless of how bleak it may feel—so that the system does not continue to fail people like him. For indeed, it is the only thing we can do.
- **Etienne:** The 5th chapter of this memoir is called “Mon Grand, L’AMOREUX AFRICAIN”. It is used, as this title portends, to speak about all the ways he loves to love on the continent. There seems to be a shared context he finds amongst indigenous Africans that remains lacking in the love he finds overseas, and throughout this chapter, his Congolese love interest, Etienne, acts as the prism with which we may see and internalise the complexities surrounding queer African love, especially of those in the diaspora. The recurring tension swelling within Etienne exists between the community he originate from and perhaps his love for himself (and his lovers). Homophobia is rife and virulent in these contexts, and what is depressing—yet all too rationalisable—is that gay men, ahead of their times, have always had to find creative ways of hiding parts of themselves to survive in settings that do not accept them wholly. And it is not just Etienne. Lamido, Peter, Atta, and so many men throughout the story's pages find themselves replicating a similar dynamic. Etienne just stands out as a highlight because it's one of the few times Edozien attempts to unpack the complexity: there's a whole chapter about him! The chapter's end makes me feel very sentimental. Right there, in the club, Edozien and Etienne are surrounded by a love like theirs. There are gay men all around being unashamedly and loving openly in all the ways society has deprived them of. Yet, this place of freedom seems to inspire as much sadness as it does happiness. The scene at hand brews a storm within Etienne, and he threatens a torrential "downpour" at any moment. There is so much regret on his part, and the freedom in front of him is only a reminder of the freedom he's lost. I've experienced this feeling (albeit in a different context) on a couple of occasions, and it's paradoxically beautiful and heartbreaking when comforting experiences show you that the original communities you called "home" only seem to embody that word in a nominal sense.
- **Area Scatter:** The moniker, Area Scatter, must have been referenced several times across my childhood, but this is the first time I actually realised who this name was referring to. Edozien uses Scatter once (in this novels entirety) as an auxiliary part of a narrative he forms in Chapter 7 that queer Nigerians have always existed, some even in times much less homophobic and transphobic than we have today. I'm a fan of Scatter for similar reasons: that the musician will always be an important element of our history, our culture, and our capacities for complete self-expression.
- **Anass (or William):** Throughout the book, Edozien recounts stories of many men who served as his lovers and friends. It feels like Anass, a man he meets Tamale, serves as a secret third thing: a thing born within this weird confluence between the two spaces. He does not deny that he finds Anass attractive or that his intentions (and frequent flirtations) border on romantic, but the way their relationship pans out is so intricate and intriguing that I can't help but smile at how gingerly they seem to navigate whatever minefields that conventionally arise from a relationship of such nature. It just seems to work, and throughout the story, it keeps working. Anass never stops singing to Chike that "me and you na forever oh", and although I was initially uneasy about how they would be able to toe the line between romance and friendship, at the end of their chapter, I could only feel electrified by the way two souls consistently decided to first love and then think about the societal markers later.
- **Scott, the good doctor:** Scott is not written with the same biographical intensity as many of Edozien’s lovers in the story, and there's a part of me that speculates that that makes our author very happy. There's a safety that appears whenever Scott is on scene, and we frequently get the impression that his love, wit, and comfort is all that he's ever wanted. He is just good and that is enough. Not good on paper, or good theoretically, or good with some specific caveats. He has met someone who is finally just good.
- **And finally, Chike:** The narrative lens does him many favours, of course, but my respect for Chike compounded with each chapter—and it was already high at the beginning. I found his unshakeable vim to be contagious very energising, and I knew that I'd love this book when he (very early on) detailed his early efforts in leaving home to indignantly pursue an education (whilst working as a janitor) in the US. His profound sense of agency/bravery is evident in each chapter; perhaps I liked it because I think it is a quality that also needs nurturing in me. I sometimes joke that Nigerian youths, in tandem with all the conventional issues that come with being young and dependent, face an incessant daily tussle with our systemic problems of sycophancy. It is a cause for celebration when someone rises above our default states of conformity to stand against bigotry and oppression, in favour of themselves regardless of the communal cost. And yet, his tone remains reflective. He is quick to make mention of the privileges a relatively accepting nuclear family affords him, and, as we can see with his interactions with Etienne, the lens with which he views the activities of queer men who do not embody his bravery is a non-judgemental one. There is no hubris on his part, and I like how commonly he describes his shortcomings. Makes him relatably human.

The final chapter offers hope in plenty, and I think it makes for a strong, cohesive ending. After taking us through the traumatic experiences of so many people—Aziz, Norbert, Victor Mukassa, and much more than I can log—he gives us a soft place to land by trying to reflect on the things that personally give him hope. It is energising for us, the audience, because instead of leaving us in the difficulty that he logs in preceding sections, he charges us to look forward, to take agency, and to continue being and believing that a safe society for all people, regardless of sexual orientation, is possible and within reach.

[I'm at the end of my review, and it isn't particularly extensive. But as this is my site and I have creative freedom, this list of a few of my favourite characters will have to do. I would recommend reading the full book yourself, though. You will find a lot more "great men" within the text]

[^1]: Now, although Smith’s novel can not fit squarely into the genre, she writes in first person, and the fictional protagonist—who we do not even know by name—takes several trips down memory lane, as one does when recounting in a memoir. 
[^2]: Joel’s been using this phrase a lot more often, and now it can’t escape my head-space.
[^3]: From the book, Tom died in December 2007 from AIDS-related complications. He doesn’t speak much about the grief of his passing, but acknowledges that he still misses him very much. A part of me wished he did speak about this. I’ve been feeling much grief across the past few months and I suppose I wanted to hear about how he continued to accept and process the reality, even 10 years on.
[^4]: I’m not entirely sure what this “work” looks like, but I’ve been trying to find it. My latest three books on my bookshelf are historical events of “revolutions” across time. I’m trying to investigate how change has always occurred across civilisations so that I may know my role in all this. As I figure this out, my path forward seems idealistically elementary. I’m “being the change I want to see” by working on doing the “right” and trying to find opportunities to raise social awareness of our many systemic issues.