---
title: Everything Has Its Wonders
date: 2024-02-11
desc: What do I do with my sadness?
---

> “Everything has its wonders, even darkness and silence, and I learn, whatever state I may be in, therein to be content.” — Helen Keller
> 

[Receiptify](https://receiptify.herokuapp.com/) currently calculates my danceability score [^1] for this month as a meagre 23.7%. I don't often ruminate over the content of these reports—it is just fun to know—but this particular one warranted more musing on my listening habits because an ACX [^2] post I read last month got the ball rolling in thinking about music and how humans tend to interact with sound in different states of being. In it, the author, Scott Alexander, hypothesises that *depressed individuals tend to listen to a disproportionate amount of sad music because their internal "emotional thymostat" is heavily miscalibrated, in turn causing them to pursue activities that (like listening to sad music) make them sadder*. I initially found this crux difficult to synthesise because so many elements in it felt too loose and open-ended. "Sad music", "depression", and even "happier music" are referenced without due specificity [^3]; we're just to assume the conventional definition. Interestingly, that bit is by design, and Alexander has a disclaimer at the top of the page describing its epistemic status as speculative. But arguing semantics is not why I've started writing this entry, and I reckon it's not why Alexander did as well. The article/argument feels dissectable because the time I spend listening to music is sizable, and as an emotive person, it feels necessary to establish the effect sound has on my psychological state.

It is also important to admit (in writing) that Alexander is a far more prolific researcher than I am, and even the components I'm most intuitively sceptical about—like "how sad music makes an individual sadder"—are backed by a heavy dose of conscientious research. Still, I am probing anyway, and I hope that this entry can, in some capacity, make a case for why I'm content with my *danceability* score being as low as it is. The goal is to have this read as almost a manifesto for "the blues" (with reference to how I've reacted to my melancholy) in any state of my being.

I am fortunate enough to be living a very privileged life. There is food continually on my table, a bed to sleep on every night, and an education that has (so far) done its best in giving me the biggest chance of “succeeding" [^4] in today's society. I count my blessings iteratively and positively, and at 19, I am aware that much has been afforded to me already that other people spend lifetimes longing for. I am also aware, however, that the positivity with which I see the world today pales in comparison to how "positive" my central paradigm was at 14. I have ebbed and flowed with the years, of course, but I objectively remember there being more sunlight in my heart in the years leading up to that age than in the years after. This marker, age 14, is not arbitrary. For in thinking about what I considered melancholy to feel like, I've had to, as a result, retrospectively consider all of my experiences (at least the ones I remember) and identify the ones that have felt most in-tune with that subconscious definition. 

I sought out these disjunctions because the initial plan was to take these diverging time periods (and their distinct moods), consider the music I listened to in them and their subsequent effects, and come to a conclusion based on whatever causal links I could find between variables, that is, my emotional state and the music listened to then. The issue so far is that there's been nothing to contrast. I started feeling dimmer at about 14/15, and that time period largely coincides with when I started listening to music on my own [^5]. I just do not have enough data yet to make the comparisons that I would like, and even if I did, making conclusions about the causation of a matter based on whatever correlation I could find would feel statistically amateurish. In truth, I already have a bias regarding how I feel I react to music, and instead of posturing to have formulated through a purely rational means, I want to admit that my justifications are almost exclusively made up of empirical, analogical evidence. I can't yet chart my emotions on a regression line, but I want to trace them in the way certain songs cling to memory. And although I know this evidence wouldn't survive peer review, I know that it survives me in my recollections, in my shifts of light and shadow, and in the sombre albums that still feel like home.

It is impossible to talk about melancholy without making mention of Justin Vernon. I can't seem to stop talking about him, and the 2000s poster boy for the contemporary indie renaissance stands as, by far, the most influential artist on my psyche til date. My entry point to his music was (like most people) his debut LP, "For Emma, Forever Ago," and although there was a palpable incongruity between his recording motivations and my lasting interpretations of his sound, the music changed me in ways that remain inarticulable. The sound was raw and unburdening, and apart from its unique ability to sonically rewire the blood vessels within my heart, I've grown up particularly grateful for the platform it gave me to decouple complexities within emotions that I was initially too scared to unravel. There is something terrifying about no longer being happy; there is a confusion that comes when you realise that you can't always will the joy into your heart; and as a young boy confronted by emotions I did not fully understand, his music and his meta [^6] allowed me to overcome the natural human impulse to shun our aliens—in turn helping me uncover layers to my existence and realise the wonder in everything.

This argument that I am making—of how Vernon's melancholy became an early agent for actualisation—came alive to me recently because I've been reading Rainer Maria Rilke's "Letters to a Young Poet”. The eighth letter in this collection sees Rilke grapple with “sadness” as a concept, extending my argument to say that melancholy is not only welcome and occasionally useful, but necessary and important.  

> “And this is why it is so important to be lonely and attentive when one is sad: because the apparently uneventful and stark moment at which our future sets foot in us is so much closer to life than that other noisy and fortuitous point of time at which it happens to us as if from outside.” 
— Rainer Maria Rilke in Letters to a Young Poet
> 

There are many layers to Rilke's argument, but the part that I find the most striking is his consistent reference to the “future”. It feels as though, for him, sadness is no longer just an emotion but a transitory element linking present psyches to future fates. He posits that when we are sad, an alteration happens: we shift gears, and that transformation brings us ever closer to our futures. His central analogy is that *sadness* is like a guest entering a house, with its integration into the space foreshadowing a new *future* for the establishment. 

My interpretation of that analogy (which, I think, is very unconventional) is that melancholy should always be a call to take agency. If the future consistently enters us when we are sad, budding within itself until its day of arrival, then paying attention to it during its gestation period may allow us to take stock of our being and make sense of the tangent that we are currently on, possibly altering it if it is an unwanted course. When this guest (sadness) enters into us—altering our psyches—we must pay attention to it and decide how it must be treated, taking charge of a pivotal transmutation phase and thus our futures. We must be slow and sensitive, and music that mirrors my current state of being helps me do that.

The alternative, Rilke explains, is much more dangerous. Ignoring our sad guest, drowning them out, and refusing to acknowledge them does no good. 

> “Only those sadnesses are dangerous and bad which one carries about among people in order to drown them out; like sicknesses that are superficially and foolishly treated they simply withdraw and after a little pause break out again the more dreadfully; and accumulate within one and are life, are unlived, spumed, lost life, of which one may die.”  
— Rainer Maria Rilke in Letters to a Young Poet
> 

It is the danger that I feel exists in advice that says that we must all just “listen to happier music”. It feels superficial, like a prescription that treats only symptoms of an ailment without ever getting to the root cause. I may very well move my body a little faster and break out a few dance moves if I increased my “danceability score”, but I do not feel that that would do me any good in mending a rift within me. “Drowning it out” will not always be the solution, and "sad music" helps provide an emotional safety net for me to unravel its complexities.

Alexander may well be right. Sad music, in an already sad state, could plunge you into a deeper, thicker storm. My only motivation for writing this was to explore whether that is always a bad thing. My (rather underdeveloped) analogical idea is that melancholy pushing me deeper into the tempest may help me find the eye of the storm. I'm also not sure I am completely alone in this. Sometimes, when I'm on YouTube or Reddit reading comments on what would normally constitute as “sad music", I find a lot of hope. There's always some comment talking about how helpful the melancholy has been in easing the hurt within. And in the off chance it doesn't (ease the hurt within), I try to remember Keller's proposition that “everything *does* have its wonders”. Gratitude will always be a virtue worth cultivating, and I will always be grateful to log this as part of my human experience.

[^1]: The danceability metric on Receiptify is explained as “how suitable a track is for dancing based on a combination of musical elements, including tempo, rhythm stability, beat strength, and overall regularity. A value of 0 is least danceable, and 100 is most danceable."
[^2]: Astral Codex Ten. It's written by psychologist Scott Alexander, who you may also know as the blogger who ran the very popular *Slater Star Codex* blog for almost a decade.
[^3]: I'm no better, here! In this entry, when I write “sad music” or "happy music", you're also well within your rights to assume the conventional meaning of those phrases. 
[^4]: Succeeding is also a vague term in this context, but I mean that my education puts me on a good platform to get a good job, create things, and live in good standing in Nigerian society.
[^5]: I always listened, but when I got a Spotify account, I felt like that helped me develop a sense of individuality regarding the type of music I liked to listen to. Music became more accessible. I could listen to things when I wanted/how I wanted, instead of listening only to whatever pop song was trendy in malls or on the radio of my parents’ car.
[^6]: Confronted with immense sorrow and dejection, Vernon took a trip to Raleigh, North Carolina, to his father's remote cabin to escape and sit with his emotions. Although he sometimes denies emerging entirely anew, he did come out with a first recording of his debut LP, "For Emma, Forever Ago". It's an inspiring story because it is an apt reminder of the human capacity to pull out wonder even when plunged into the deepest abyss.