---
title: Flow State
date: 2024-05-07
desc: How do I keep my wheels turning?
---

A lot of my effort, motivation and drive plateaued over April’s end. I found it particularly frustrating because the deadlines come thick and fast at the end of each month, and against my better attempts to finish April strongly, I ended up signing out operating at **~**50% of my desired ability. May has started much better, though. It feels like I’m ploughing through tasks like a juggernaut, and as I attempt to bask in the high that this productive stretch has given me, the notes that follow are from my thoughts as to why I might've suddenly hit the groove. I am wary of writing this in the tone of “this is my perfect guide on how to get out of a funk.” Situational complexity exists, and the whole idea is to just have this as a reference point, an instance of me working optimally that I can draw on at a later time when that might not be the case.

### Nouveau

Joel and I crossed into 2024—albeit in different time-zones—on a phone call together. We'd spoken about new beginning many times before then, but as the clock hit midnight and we went on about our hopes for the new year, I couldn't help but sense the new electricity surging through my body. It felt incredibly relieving, like a cleansing of all the disappointment I had accrued over the past year—to be replaced only by renewed promise, hope, and ambition. And now May, in all its intensity and homeliness, seems to have brought some of that “electricity” with it once more.

I understand that none of this that I’ve described is either novel or strange. The word “new” carries with it photons of energy to be activated whenever one speaks it: **new** year, **new** month, **new** week, **new** day. The possibility of a renewal will always bring with it much excitement, and I believe the hack is of finding ways of [tapping into that on a much more consistent basis](https://twitter.com/joeladejola/status/1741526867377586352). I’ve spent a few minutes here thinking of the subtle ways I think my brain already subconsciously does (or did) this:

- I've tried many times to create a specific and distinct scent for myself, but this has always been hard to do because I’ve consistently found it impossible to hold on to a deodorant brand [^1]. The brands that I buy keep rotating, and I look forward to trying a new scent whenever the stick in use finally runs out. Now there is a possibility that I've just never found a scent that syncs seamlessly with my being, but I think my head also sees as it a simple, cost-effective way of triggering the activation of some renewal energy. After a while, I get excited about the possibility of smelling different, and altogether *new*.
- When I was much younger, I had this tendency to erratically rack up sleeping hours during the day with several, spontaneous naps. I noticed then, and even more so now, that I didn't always sleep because I was tired, but because I'd sometimes be confronted with some seemingly insurmountable task. Closing my eyes, to later open them, served not only as a way to momentarily forget about the task and its difficulties, but also as a way of reusing some of the energy that came from waking up. The random naps during the day were usually appended with the expectation that I was going to be different, more energised or more motivated when it was time to wake up and start again. I’d be lying if I said that each nap was duly transformative, but the slight possibility that some of that renewal energy could hit me after each sleep cycle sometimes presented strong enough odds for me to take that gamble consistently.
- I've made about 7 different changes to this archive since the month began. They aren't particularly huge or transformative; I've only really played with fonts, colours, graphics and some micro-level architectural paradigms [^2]. A lot of these changes usually precede a burst of creative effort. It is energising to see more green circles take shape on my GitHub contributions panel, and shipping a new version of this site to production feels akin to reinventing myself again [^3], though on a smaller magnitude.
- I do a “clear out” of sorts on Figma each month. This involves going through different project files and merging similar ones or deleting them altogether. A lot of these projects are created sporadically when I'm trying to set off neurons in my head. Building new things (at least temporarily) sometimes gives me enough energy to power through the other miscellaneous tasks.

Some of the examples that I've explained above are not heavily detrimental. In fact, I could make the case that a lot of it has been very helpful in the uncomfortable situations I've found myself in before. Still, as helpful as I've found them to be, my over-indulgence in either of these can sometimes be harmful. Continuity is a positive, and even though trying hard to inject my head space with electricity can kick-start something, it can also prevent me from generating enough momentum to focus long enough on the task. It's a benefit to just keep ploughing through, and getting comfortable with the mundane.

### Breathing Space

As I’ve approached different checkpoints across the years, it’s come with this near-obsessive want to plan as much as possible. It might be something to do with getting older and understanding time’s passage, as whenever I’ve had an opportunity come my way, it’s always felt heavier than the cumulative sum of all others before. For instance, in the months leading up to my final 2 years of secondary education, I spent an obscene amount of time just “planning”. I made Excel sheets and huge text documents detailing what exactly I was to do with my months, weeks, days, and even hours. The time ahead of me felt dense, and 16-year-old me wanted to make sure I didn’t waste a second.

But the thing with making plans is that going way beyond an acceptable thresholds is so easy, and sometimes you can blink and look up to see that the light above you is waning—because you're much deeper into the efficiency rabbit hole than you initially wanted to be. Breathing space is always beneficial, and the best spaces are the ones that give you the grace to colour outside the lines.

A good example of this is probably Real Madrid. I'm presently living in an era where European competitions are ruthlessly dominated by them. They've won 5 of the last 9 Champions League titles, and that will probably be 6 titles in 10 years when June 1st comes around. They've also already won the competition 14 times, twice as many as the second most successful club (AC Milan). Now what I've found particularly enjoyable about their football is that it all just appears so simple. Football is a player's game, and I feel like everyone in Real Madrid is all too aware of that. Unlike so many other teams today, it hardly ever feels "algorithmic", like the players have been robotised to complete a certain amount of passes or stay certain distances between each other. Instead, across the years, it just feels like they've spent a lot of time stockpiling the world's best talent and putting them on platforms to succeed. There's obviously a lot more tactical depth in their play than I'm describing now, but I think it's just cool to see a group that isn't stifled by obsessive coaching automatisms and instead given trust and freedom to solve in-game problems as a collective.

It's something I'd love to get better at, too. In my case, improving player quality would mean just trying to get the best out of myself and my mind. It'd help to read, write, and learn more about my craft too! The next bit would be to remember that it will always be impossible to predict/carve out every minute detail of what's ahead of me. A good part of life will take [falling into](https://www.startingfromnix.com/p/falling-into-life); I'll just need to trust myself and take the handbrake off from time to time.

### Fire and Brimstone

Still, plateauing is inescapable. Even the healthiest engines have to go off sometimes, and it is a tough ask to expect myself (or any human for that matter) to maintain a sky-high level everyday, for months on end. Getting into a rut is not a knew feeling for me. Reflectively, since I decided to get serious about working hard (which I feel happened fairly early in my life), I can at will reference numerous occasions were it's just felt like I was in a bog.

In some occasions, the slump just passed naturally: I slept, ate, and woke up one day inspired enough to continue climbing my mountain. But in the times where my slumps have been extended, I've found more joy trying to softly investigate the root of my discomfort.

I'm not alone in this line of thinking. There's this incredible [article](https://substack.com/home/post/p-131253296) I read last year that spoke about the author's relationship with some of his first-order emotional responses and the (subsequent) second-order feelings about those emotions. He begins the essay talking about times when those meta-cognitive processes have been maladaptive, but at the end, when he documents a lot of the healthy ways he now tries to solve the emotional turmoil, he advocates for a "harmonious" relationship between those two "orders" of thought.

On my end, a lot of what this means is trying to not get too worked up about poor performances. Whilst keeping myself in check/accountable will always be important, I'm not sure saturating my head with overtly negative/self-deprecating thoughts is a good/sustainable way to keep working well. Instead I believe that trying to generate a high level of curiosity (and compassion) regarding these shortcomings always feel more fruitful. Behaviours and whims are awash with complexity and nuance. Sometimes, I would feel stuck because there was an [ugh-field](https://www.lesswrong.com/posts/EFQ3F6kmt4WHXRqik/ugh-fields) around an important task that needed careful undoing. Another time, it would be because I had some worry that was acting as a task-blocker to my other commitments. Each "boggy" episode is always unique and propagated by different variables. Reflecting on the bogginess in a plain, non-judgmental way allows me to pull them out so I can start thinking of ways of improving/getting better.

### Listening Habits

There is an [entry](https://onkhida.me/c/centre-stage) I published several months ago that talked about instrumentals and how useful they can be when trying to create some sort of base to do work with. It's been about 7 months since then, and I still maintain a very similar position: whenever I need to roll up my sleeves, my instrumentals are the main things I turn to as a platform to help me go over the line.

This love—for the 'lyricless' sound—has only been intensified by my (fairly new) appreciation of contemporary pop songs that have now been [re-imagined as classical music](https://open.spotify.com/playlist/37i9dQZF1DWUPafHP1BJw1?si=18849259cee34970). This music works well because I can enjoy all the benefits of classic instrumentals with the shared familiarity that comes with knowing the original contemporary pop songs.

For good measure, I think that listening well whilst doing work requires the activity of "listening" to be very low-effort. In an ideal world, the task I want to do needs to take up much of the real estate in my head, and so that also means that I shouldn't give too much thought into curating the perfect listening experience. I think the **main** goal of background music should be to get one into the "deep work" phase and not necessarily to **keep** one there. Realistically, I want to be so engrossed in what I'm doing that the song being played doesn't even really matter anymore. The music just needs to be "[activation energy](https://open.spotify.com/playlist/67Qhw8nCwG8Idia3dPY9tr?si=3cb557fd423d416f)" and not necessarily the fuel to keep me running.

My thoughts regarding “[shuffling](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shuffle_play)” my playlists when doing work are not as concrete as I would like at this time. On one hand, the familiarity that comes with listening to a playlist sequentially can be beneficial. My brain loves familiarity, and I can feel the energy pulsing through me when I can already anticipate the new chords I’m about to hear when the active song is just fading out. But anything can get stale sometimes. I have found myself hitting the shuffle button on playlists I know are to be listened to sequentially because, in a way, the uncertainty can feel exciting. Randomly creating a new order by shuffling feels to be my way of setting off some renewal energy. When the order gets jumbled up, it starts to feel like a familiar playlist is now completely different and brand new, and sometimes that “new” feeling is all I need to set myself up in a productive way. 

Still, *shuffling* probably falls under the list of variables that are largely inconsequential, and I think it’s okay to freestyle this bit. I think it’s generally okay to decide whether or not I want to click the button in the moment. 

### Asymptotes

The thing with “working” is that I am to continue indefinitely. As I wrote when I completed my 20th lap around the sun, no to-do list is ever truly complete, and as long as air fills my lungs, a path will always open ahead of me. We are like functions tending towards infinity, forever ebbing and flowing across time. I find that uncomfortable to think about sometimes, but I feel it is a platitude that I must internalise so that I do not go on equating my self-worth to momentary performance levels. For I will be up and I will be down, but I will always be me all the same.

[^1]: Incredibly random, but the deodorant brand I've used for the longest is this [Sure Men Sport Cool deodorant](https://m.media-amazon.com/images/I/61jidD-O0hL._AC_SL1295_.jpg) at 5 months. It was musky and perhaps too heavy, but 15-year-old me loved it all the same.

[^2]: The content on this site is now entirely ingested through markdown files. I was using an online CMS before this (Strapi), but this feels better to me.
[^3]: The way I run social media accounts also follows a similar pattern. I sometimes change a profile picture or username to “freshen things up” from time to time.