---
title: Development as modernity
author: Lwazi Siyabonga Lushaba
year: 2009
date: 2026-3-31
desc: One-shotted, workable, but speculative notes from my read on Lushaba's short book. As is made central in the text, this follows on discussions about African development, modernity theory, and the Enlightenment.
authorImage: /assets/images/readings/author-img/lwazi-lushaba.jpeg
---
It was impossible to think about or review this text in isolation. I have a friend studying at Cornell who, over the past year or so, has become enthralled by the works of Olúfẹ́mi Táíwò, a professor at the same institution. Per his recommendation, I also elected to peruse Táíwò's body of work, and I was halfway through his 2014 manifesto, "Africa Must Be Modern", when I put a temporary halt on reading proceedings to quickly cover this book instead. The decision to make this pivot was not arbitrary. At the beginning, I found Táíwò's argument so compelling that throughout the duration of the manifesto's first part, I could not stop my head from (physically) nodding in approval. But I had a simultaneous fear whilst reading that my agreeability was a direct consequence of my rather cursory understanding of Africa's geopolitical history, especially with the West. My very untested idea, as a result of this fear, was that in giving myself an initially "oppositional" backbone, I would be able to better interrogate the relevant parts of Táíwò's crux.

I would be grossly oversimplifying things if I were to define the two texts as _purely_ oppositional. They do have a little more in common than they initially let on, but (at least from the first 50 pages of Táíwò's manifesto that I have read) it feels like the vantage point that both writers use in articulating their ideas remains in stark dissonance. I was excited about Lushaba's paper because I felt like it had the ability to add some real roundness to a budding perspective. Besides, I was already making the case in my head that if, after Lushaba's paper, I could still, at the end of Táíwò's manifesto, remain aligned with Táíwò, it would help me to internally grade the strength, solidity, and persuasiveness of Táíwò's unconventional paradigm.

The approach that I adopt towards reviewing Lushaba in the paragraphs that follow won't form its own dialogue with what I think Táíwò's perspective is, even though it was as such in my head. I will only try to summarise (in isolation) the many arguments he makes throughout and the perspectives that I found most illuminatory. I may, sometimes, punctuate some sections with evaluative thoughts on the discourse at hand. I also do not adopt a standardised method in interacting with the content. These are initial, working notes that I will revisit at a later time. I lift a lot of quotes from the text source and keep (in parentheses) the page number I am taking his words from. This is to allow me to jump back into the surrounding context of the quote when I need to revisit.

As the tenets in my head go through constant iterations, this may change. This may not. But these are my thoughts as of March 31, 2026.
## Semantics
It is easy to get lost in the meaning of words, even the simple ones. Communication is a tricky experience, and the dynamism of words coming in different contexts, especially when the subject matter is delicate, can make for a very precarious experience. It is with this in mind that Lushaba begins his expedition. He is quick to acquiesce that, whilst "scholars of development in Africa have argued that, for the continent to develop, it first has to break free from the yoke of neo-colonialism and reject Western bourgeois economic theory ... [that specific] question of what the meaning of 'development' in Africa should be was left unanswered." (pg. 4) He is not the first person to provide conscientious, strong evidence on the abundance that exists outside the Western construct, but in pushing for progress, it is helpful to define the meaning of progress, at least in the African context. Knowing what not to do, he illustrates, is an important first step; however, it is an incomplete one if we do not zero in on a destination of our own.

Before defining what this elusive "progress" should be, he spends time instead speaking about its adjacent word, "development". To aid his efforts, he uses two otherwise contrasting schools of thought—Marxism and "bourgeois economic theory and analysis"—to show that the very conventional definition of development is modernity. More so, he makes the case that these schools of thought, which have been imprinted, by large, into African frameworks, "subscribe to the notion that for Africa to develop it must 'modernise'." (pg. 3) So modernity was meant to mean development, and development was meant to mean modernity.

Now, what does this "modernity" mean? The bulk of his paper is geared towards answering this question, but what he makes us clinically aware of early on is that the concept of modernity and all that follows it has strong roots in the Enlightenment. "In a word", Lushaba says, "modernity is an eighteenth-century theory of the Enlightenment." So all that we refer to as modern or as products of modernity is the direct consequence of the theorising of philosophers from the larger Western Enlightenment project. The aim of his documentation is to problematise this; even more so, Lushaba hopes to, in showing all the ways the Enlightenment/modernity has plundered the continent in past, explain why we must do away with it entirely in our attempts to drive Africa forward.
## Uncanny Transmutations
The most riveting parts of Lushaba's argument exist in the paragraphs where he tries to map the genealogy of modernity. By going through three eras (of early modernity, capitalist modernity, and hyper-modernity), he shows that many of the structures we see today are mere transmutations of the initially oppressive structures that emerged from the European enlightenment period.
### Developmental Economics
_Developmental Economics_ continues on the foundations laid in the Enlightenment's original discourse. Just as the European philosophers in the Enlightenment period separated the _world_ into categories of modern vs pre-modern, setting themselves as the gold standard that their non-Western counterparts were to look up to and evolve towards, the science behind "developmental economics" today defines "underdeveloped" countries specifically by the things they lack in reference to their Western counterparts. Developmental economics uses the West to create the scale with which every other entity must be measured and creates discussions revolving around how underdeveloped countries can, in turn, become like the West. 

Lushaba seems incredibly incensed by this, explaining that: "Such thinking is premised on the perverted logic that, divergent initial conditions and socio-historical contexts notwithstanding, the latter categories are bound to evolve towards their future destiny epitomised by modern western societies of the humanitas." (pg. 22)
> "Since the modern West is taken as the epitome of development, bourgeois development economic theory finds no reason to define development. Suffice to know that only by mimicking the West can Africa develop. Questions such as the desirability or feasibility of the Western development trajectory in the African context fall by the wayside." (pg. 23)

### Globalisation
Lushaba also argues that "globalisation (and its attendant neoliberal discourse) is not new but a continuation by other means of the 'civilising mission' entailed in the theory of modernity." The platform he rests this case on is held together by his interrogation of 1) "foreign direct investment to trigger growth and cover the financing gap", 2) "macro-economic reforms", and 3) "trade liberalisation". The current FDI model is predicated on the _supposed fact_ that an increase in foreign investment is directly linked to an increase in the growth rate in African countries. On several counts, Lushaba proves that this is not true. In the end, we are left to realise that the FDI model is insufficient for a simple reason: "growth is a function of multiple variables, not just investment, thus making the relationship between investment and growth loose and unstable." (pg. 33). But even if we were to reevaluate the structures that make FDI central to supposed "development" and instead make it a supplementary activity, Lushaba still posits that we should remain perpetually weary of capital flowing from overseas. Most of the Western private capital, he explains, "goes either to the mineral resource sectors, which operate as enclave economies without any backward linkage with the rest of the economy, or towards acquisition of existing industries through privatisation." This has destabilising consequences because it "legitimates the plunder of Africa's natural resources and domination of African economies by Western multinational companies." (pg. 35). Another brief but astute argument he makes is that "social responsibility is foreign to the logic of capital." When activities are centred around around "profit-making", the social consequences of activities become an after thought, and "if capital is generally irresponsible, foreign capital is doubly irresponsible."

His thoughts about *macro-economic reforms* conducted by institutions like the IMF follow a similar thread to what is explained in the paragraph above. Much of the economic concepts he uses, I have a surface-level (but working) understanding of, and in arguing, he uses academic work by British economist John Keynes, in showing how policies enacted by the IMF/World Bank have been heavily detrimental to African economies. I won't repeat here, verbatim, the steps he's taken in reaching his conclusion, but what is important is that the austerity measures that are so stringently imposed by Western bodies subvert the expansionary logic of Keynesian economic thought. 
> "Through the instrumentalisation of political/economic conditionalities and the international economic architecture, Western hegemons bring pressure to bear on African countries to institute deflationary policies, i.e., reducing budget deficits to zero by severely cutting government expenditure and borrowing, increasing interest rates to counter inflation, etc., that are all obviously at variance with the expansionary logic of Keynesian economics." (pg. 41)

### On Comparative Advantage
Continuing on the narrative that problematises globalisation, Lushaba goes on to make the claim that the static theory of comparative advantage, the trade liberalisation strategy, is also a continuation of the Enlightenment school of thought and thus our dependence on the West. The theory of comparative advantage, put simply, reinforces the need for countries to continue in whatever production endeavours yield the lowest opportunity cost. This means that, to preserve their comparative advantage, countries should produce/export the goods that they find easy to do, with no seismic costs: agricultural countries should export their crops, countries with raw materials should export their natural resources, and technological countries should export their high-tech products. Now, whilst experts may laud its benefits in world trade globally, Lushaba believes (and I now do too) that this line of thinking can be especially harmful to African countries.

As a continent, we are endowed with valuable raw materials and a fertile enough ground to grow crops. Comparative advantage tells us to barter that all away to foreign countries and take, in return, what their comparative advantage allows them to produce: high-tech, industrial output, and finished goods. A question we hear invariably when discussing the many ways our communities err is with regard to why African countries keep exporting their raw materials only to have it processed, repackaged, and imported from the West. I suppose an answer to our grumblings is that we've just been following the established system set in place by the theory of comparative advantage. In the colonial period that was propagated by ideas from the Enlightenment, the continent was divided into segments; each segment was told what and how to produce based on their setting and the specific needs of the West.

Today, the theory of comparative advantage tells Africa (rather covertly) to continue to specialise in the niche resources we have in abundance, especially because the West needs them! Lushaba aptly notes that "history does not have single example of an economy that aims from the outset at penetrating the international market before it has developed to competitive levels" (pg. 49), and, in many ways, the African adherence to conventional economic theory has kept us as cogs in the machinery of an international trade system that does little to benefit us. We should be spending more time insulated and maturing, closed from "the vagaries of external competition through various protectionist measures", as the author puts it.
> The theory of comparative advantage effectively legitimises Africa's underdevelopment in its logic that African countries should focus exclusively on the production of those goods in which they are relatively advantaged. Simply put, the theory is static; it wants to maintain the status quo indefinitely. (pg. 51)

## (Sapere Aude) In Circles
The conclusive section of Lushaba's paper, "Beyond Western Modernity", serves as a charge to think beyond the boundaries set by Western modernity. I recently [read the transcript of an interview Lushaba and Professor Lategan did for The Gadfly Magazine](https://www.thegadflymagazine.org/home-1/the-panacea-of-pan-africanism-discussing-decolonization-with-lwazi-lushaba-and-ziyana-lategan), and in a response [^1] to a question asking whether decolonising is a necessary aim to develop an African concept of development [^2], Lushaba postulates:
> "Professor Lategan has alluded to the first problem, which is to retrospectively apply African modes of cognizing to Western categories of knowledge. They will ask us, "What is your philosophy?" And then we will answer, "Here, here is our own philosophy, African philosophy." They will ask us, "Where's your botany?" And then we're going to scramble. "Here, here is our idea of water." And at some point, we're going to run out of resources, because those are not our categories. That's not how we categorize knowledge."

In his paper and throughout his interview, we understand that in our attempts to move beyond Western modernity, we must be careful not to centre our monologues and cognitive efforts around the predefined Western backbone. "Cognising" requires us to think for ourselves (sapere aude, he explains), on a clean slate, free from scaffolds of thought set by the Enlightenment discourse centuries ago. "Doing so", Lushaba elaborates, "entails questioning the received paradigm of Western modernity in its different forms, either as bourgeois economic theory and analysis or Marxism."

In the final part of this conclusive section, Lushaba finds (with empirical examples) reasons to believe that this independent way of interacting with "modernity" will reverberate across the continent. And because of this, "with the hegemony of Western modernity loosened from its moorings, an opportunity may have finally arisen for an African development discourse that lies beyond its bounds." (pg. 60)

This premise is objectively hopeful, but when I initially read that line (about an opportunity for better development discourse), the questions just kept coming: Did this opportunity arise at the time? Did we eventually take advantage of the rise? Is this opportunity still rising? If it is, how would taking advantage of it (especially in an individual lens like mine) look like? This is a 2009 paper; I was 5 at the time and don't have a lot of context on what that year was like or what the budding opportunity (if it did arise) did in the surrounding milieus. In the coming days, I'll probably try to figure that out. The paper also echoes perspectives found in conventional dependence theory, and as such, a progressive step from this will be in the works of Samir Amin. 

I've had fun reading through this, though. It's a short paper, 80 pages, and covering it took two days of fun reading during lunch break at work. The narrative flows organically, and Lushaba is easy to understand. The only gripe I could find is more related to my initial interpretations and expectations than to the quality or validity of the arguments in the paper. When Lushaba explained in his introductory segment that past efforts to call for a break from the yoke of colonialism so that Africa can develop failed to describe what "development" means, I was half-hoping that there would be some section dedicated to describing what a "developed" Africa was meant to look like. He has done well to explain what not to do, but for people like me, who find it easy to waft in the interludes between islands, I was hoping for some solid ground—a tangible destination to internalise and iterate towards.

Or perhaps the process of interrogation that he wants us to adopt is, in this case, more powerful than an example framework of what Africa should be. He has provided a paradigm to adopt as one thinks about development in the African context. I reckon he has allowed the readers to do the thinking independently, merely providing caveats on what not to do when thinking about development in Africa.

I suppose I've also felt a bit weary about the fact that this was published in 2009. I live in a society 17 years in front of its publishing date, and (at least) Nigeria does not seem to be on the right tangent. I am naïve, and I may also have an unrealistic perception of the timelines that "development" organically fits into, but I sometimes fear how easy it is to spend time cyclically thinking about thinking. At the end, Lushaba aptly notes that "a caveat to add is that this struggle to construct our own modernity can no longer be a bourgeois-led struggle. The bourgeoisie's progressive credentials expired with independence. From then on, it became an ally of the West and adopted Western modernity as its own modernity." (pg. 61). So the next struggle, the next revolution, will not be propagated by the national elites. The hunch is that change will only come from within, from the common person. It is unlikely that the everyday Nigerian or African will dive into African philosophy/historicity, grappling with constructs in hope for collective enlightenment. History rewards pragmatism; the steps we take from now should show a renewed understanding of that fact.

[^1]: I've abridged the full quote. In the interview, he goes further, offering an example of a body of knowledge from the Kano Chronicles that had a system completely outside Western architecture.
[^2]: The full question, if you want to search for the section on the webpage, is "Both Western and African philosophy departments often subjugate African and indigenous philosophies to Western philosophers. Is decolonizing in this vein a necessary aim to develop an African concept of development?"